coding_guidelines.md, before:

# Implementation guidelines

In this document, I try to collect the lessons I learn before/while/after coding. 
It mainly serves as my personal reminder and to force myself to make my thoughts more precise.

I've tried to order my thoughts in different phases and roughly in a "temporal order" as you would encounter them implementing a class.

No claim made on having the best solutions.

## Planning

- *Test your algorithm on paper*: Everybody tells you that, first think about your algorithm, then code it.
- *Edgecase overview*: If a paper is available, go through the paper and make a summary of all edge cases/strange situations your data structure could end up in. 
Implementing the general case and then realising there is a certain necessary special case, can mess up quite a lot. 
Take for example one wants to implement random real numbers in the interval `[0, 1)`. 
When compared they generate new digits until they differ. 
Sometimes one might want to compare a randomly generated number with a deterministic number (for example a `0` or `0.111…`/`1`). 
This is a common operation in treaps (for example when merging and splitting).

## Tools

- *Know your tools*: Most IDEs are very powerful, but you need to know where the buttons are. 
Keep reading the tips-and-tricks pages of your favourite blog or book.

## Implementation

- *Start with the interface*: I prefer to start with the interface. 
It forces you to think about the operations you want to support. 
Starting with the implementation of an algorithm can lead to a lot of unnecessary refactoring. 
Another important reason is that most people will be interested in the interface when they work with your code. 
Implementation details only interest "advanced users".
- *Know the language*: This comes with experience. 
Never stop learning a language if you want to master it. 
I tend to learn a new feature (for example `noexcept`) and use it all over the place. 
That's ok, but keep an open mind and regularly check the basics. 
In our example, one would then see that putting `noexcept` blindly everywhere can lead to problems since it's part of the interface. 
If you suddenly decide to remove it, you can't since it's part of the contract. 
Going in the other direction is a lot easier, you always can add a `noexcept` and make the contract tighter on your side.
- *Comments*: Write down your design decisions. 
Why did you solve something the way you solved it? Working out what a code does is a question of experience, time and reverse engineering skills. 
But getting the answer to a "why?" question is really hard. 
Maybe explain in one or two sentences why you prefer one solution over some other. 
Coming back after half a year and trying to fix a bug with a wrong model in mind can cost you a lot of time.

## Testing

- *Do unit-testing*: I'm a big fan of testing. 
First reason is, it makes debugging a lot easier. 
If you know a certain value triggers a bug; you normally need to start your application and create the exact situation such that the bug is triggered. 
This can be time-consuming. 
If your code is unit testable, tracking a bug down is a matter of one additional test.
- *Don't over-do testing*: Testing is important. 
As a personal tendency, it seems like I put too many test cases, which makes changing code hard. 
Still working on finding the perfect balance …

## Cleanup

- *Write descriptive comments with context*: Imagine: The first thing somebody sees of your code, is the HTML documentation for your class. 
If a variable is called `alarmSettings`, don't comment it with `settings for the alarm`. 
Try to give something more descriptive like `allows to set alarm attributes like date, time and duration, for a complete list of possible values see xxx.` 
It gives no new information. 
Tell the user what it's for and in the best case give a hint where the bigger picture is explained. 
(Don't over-do it, a link/reference to a paper or some well-chosen keywords in the class description might be sufficient.)
- *Use Lint and similar tools*: Yes, coding style helps to understand code. 
Honestly, I don't care if I write an `if` with or without a space between parenthesis (`if(){}` <-> `if () {}`). 
I normally turn those hints off if they conflict with my personal style (consistency is important, not the concrete choice).
Let the computer be your teacher, and let it show you style issues that can cause serious bugs. 
The problem zones of a language are well known, and solutions are often easy. 
One of my favourite examples is `==` and `===` in JavaScript, both work, but `===` clearly leads to fewer bugs since it's closer to the intuition.

Commit message:

coding guidelines: Learn from professionals

coding_guidelines.md, after:

# Implementation guidelines

In this document, I try to collect the lessons I learn before/while/after coding. 
It mainly serves as my personal reminder and to force myself to make my thoughts more precise.

I've tried to order my thoughts in different phases and roughly in a "temporal order" as you would encounter them implementing a class.

No claim made on having the best solutions.

## Planning

- *Test your algorithm on paper*: Everybody tells you that, first think about your algorithm, then code it.
- *Edgecase overview*: If a paper is available, go through the paper and make a summary of all edge cases/strange situations your data structure could end up in. 
Implementing the general case and then realising there is a certain necessary special case, can mess up quite a lot. 
Take for example one wants to implement random real numbers in the interval `[0, 1)`. 
When compared they generate new digits until they differ. 
Sometimes one might want to compare a randomly generated number with a deterministic number (for example a `0` or `0.111…`/`1`). 
This is a common operation in treaps (for example when merging and splitting).
- *Learn from professionals*: Often somebody already solved the same or a similar problem (Especially if you're reimplementing something for the sake of learning). 
If you roughly know, what you want to do, go and look at the solutions other people came up with. 
There's nearly always a way to find the solution of an expert since there are many open-source libraries/projects out there.
In the simplest way, go and check your STL implementation. 
Many classes are templates, and so you can find big chunks of the code on your machine in the header files.

## Tools

- *Know your tools*: Most IDEs are very powerful, but you need to know where the buttons are. 
Keep reading the tips-and-tricks pages of your favourite blog or book.

## Implementation

- *Start with the interface*: I prefer to start with the interface. 
It forces you to think about the operations you want to support. 
Starting with the implementation of an algorithm can lead to a lot of unnecessary refactoring. 
Another important reason is that most people will be interested in the interface when they work with your code. 
Implementation details only interest "advanced users".
- *Know the language*: This comes with experience. 
Never stop learning a language if you want to master it. 
I tend to learn a new feature (for example `noexcept`) and use it all over the place. 
That's ok, but keep an open mind and regularly check the basics. 
In our example, one would then see that putting `noexcept` blindly everywhere can lead to problems since it's part of the interface. 
If you suddenly decide to remove it, you can't since it's part of the contract. 
Going in the other direction is a lot easier, you always can add a `noexcept` and make the contract tighter on your side.
- *Comments*: Write down your design decisions. 
Why did you solve something the way you solved it? Working out what a code does is a question of experience, time and reverse engineering skills. 
But getting the answer to a "why?" question is really hard. 
Maybe explain in one or two sentences why you prefer one solution over some other. 
Coming back after half a year and trying to fix a bug with a wrong model in mind can cost you a lot of time.

## Testing

- *Do unit-testing*: I'm a big fan of testing. 
First reason is, it makes debugging a lot easier. 
If you know a certain value triggers a bug; you normally need to start your application and create the exact situation such that the bug is triggered. 
This can be time-consuming. 
If your code is unit testable, tracking a bug down is a matter of one additional test.
- *Don't over-do testing*: Testing is important. 
As a personal tendency, it seems like I put too many test cases, which makes changing code hard. 
Still working on finding the perfect balance …

## Cleanup

- *Write descriptive comments with context*: Imagine: The first thing somebody sees of your code, is the HTML documentation for your class. 
If a variable is called `alarmSettings`, don't comment it with `settings for the alarm`. 
Try to give something more descriptive like `allows to set alarm attributes like date, time and duration, for a complete list of possible values see xxx.` 
It gives no new information. 
Tell the user what it's for and in the best case give a hint where the bigger picture is explained. 
(Don't over-do it, a link/reference to a paper or some well-chosen keywords in the class description might be sufficient.)
- *Use Lint and similar tools*: Yes, coding style helps to understand code. 
Honestly, I don't care if I write an `if` with or without a space between parenthesis (`if(){}` <-> `if () {}`). 
I normally turn those hints off if they conflict with my personal style (consistency is important, not the concrete choice).
Let the computer be your teacher, and let it show you style issues that can cause serious bugs. 
The problem zones of a language are well known, and solutions are often easy. 
One of my favourite examples is `==` and `===` in JavaScript, both work, but `===` clearly leads to fewer bugs since it's closer to the intuition.
